[Music]
no words can make feelings as palpable
as a gentle touch
but a touch can also relieve pain
strengthen our immune system
and even make us live longer
[Music]
long mainly ignored by science
gentle touch is finally getting the
attention it deserves
[Music]
touch is a fundamental i would say it's
an absolute necessity as much as the air
we breathe and the food that we eat
and it can calm your whole world it can
make your body feel better you become
less stressed
[Music]
touching stimuli change the biochemistry
of our brain in a dramatic and positive
way
and now we can't do it as much we start
to notice how incredibly important it is
[Music]
the first touch
one of the most important moments in our
lives
this baby cannot see further than 30
centimeters yet
and our sense of hearing does not fully
develop until we are four weeks old
[Music]
we first experience the world through
touch
it seems we're so reliant on our sense
of touch that it is even essential to
our survival we can't do without it
because it's the easiest way for us to
interact with our environment
[Music]
when a baby cries it wants to feel its
parents touch
words are not yet enough to soothe it
without the gentle pressure of the womb
babies find a sense of security through
caress and body heat
they are reassured that someone is there
and cares for them
touching strengthens the bond between
child and parents from the very first
moment
we mentioned yeah we humans are heard
animals in this way i think that we
actually use touch to learn and feel
that we are now part of our group
and our community also protects us
i think that this is especially
important at the beginning of life that
we know we are not alone that there is
someone who will take care of us and we
now somehow belong to this community
with these other people
we as humans need relationships
no one can exist on their own
we evolved to live together in a small
group
because it offers us protection from the
elements and our enemies
and we express belonging through touch
it makes us feel secure close
gives us comfort or pleasure
it is how we express joy and connection
[Music]
humans have a highly differentiated
system for perceiving and classifying
touch
because a touch can also mean power and
violence
it can frighten and threaten us
in fractions of a second the receptors
in our skin tell us just what kind of
touch it is
[Music]
whether we should relax
or spring to action to escape danger
recognizing and classifying touch is the
very first language we learn
science has only recently begun to
research how subtle and nuanced this
language really is
rebecca buma and her colleague in ling
cooping sweden are investigating the
role that touch plays in our
communication
this one now look at this yeah just how
good is it at expressing our emotions
the two test subjects cannot see each
other
they try to convey different messages by
just using their arm or hand
i love you
i'm sad
watch out
electrodes register the slightest
movements of the facial muscles an
objective method to measure emotions
[Music]
the information she is supposed to
communicate to him appears on a screen
and he can recognize her messages
of course you can also try to convey
emotions with words
but i think what comes across and what
you actually feel is something else
it's entirely different if i say to
someone hey i love you
or if i show it by touching
hugging kissing or cuddling with them
above all we are better able to convey
love and compassion through touch than
through words facial expressions or
gestures
touch creates a much deeper emotional
connection
how has the fact that we now have to
keep our distance affected us and our
relationships
it just creates barriers it creates
barriers between people and so if you
cannot reach out and touch someone
it means you lack that
interaction with them and
it means that we can't reinforce our
social bonds and this is especially true
at the moment for younger people who are
learning how to interact
and so in a normal world we would shake
hands or hug or kiss especially children
and now we have to tell them no no you
can't do it
and so not only does it have an impact
on social relationships that we make for
the moment but it could have bigger
implications for the future as well
just reaching your hand out to another
person creates a kind of relationship
with them
but how does that happen
this is one of the questions that
neuroscientist rochelle ackerly is
investigating at the university of ex
marseille
although the pandemic has forced her to
take a break from her research her
findings are generating an ever greater
interest
because many of us are acutely aware of
what we are missing in our lives right
now
gentle touch can be both calming it can
be relaxing but it's also something that
we need it's essential for life because
if we didn't have reward in touch if we
didn't find it pleasurable we wouldn't
do it and if we didn't do it we wouldn't
be here
[Music]
touch is especially important at the
beginning of life
after birth it stabilizes breathing body
temperature and even blood sugar levels
through contact babies sense their
physical boundaries
that helps them to learn the difference
between themselves and others
it is essential for certain
developmental milestones
and then you can still see the effects
of it even 10 years later that there are
cognitive differences between babies who
had experienced a lot of touch and those
who had experienced very little
a basic biological need
and yet for many years cuddling stroking
and hugging children was frowned upon
as late as the 1950s and 1960s physical
closeness was considered unnecessary or
even harmful
but research and experience has changed
all this
especially among our closest relatives
[Music]
they clearly demonstrate what happens
when newborns do not experience
closeness and
touch if animals only received basic
care for months after birth many of them
died
and those that survived suffered
irreparable psychological and physical
damage
they showed reduced body growth
underdeveloped immune systems and an
inability to perform even the simplest
memory functions
central areas in the brain were impaired
and showed reduced volume
[Music]
because touch has a very direct effect
on our brains
it is essential for us to develop a
sense of self
physical contact sets important
developmental processes in motion and
also stimulates
growth when a baby is touched millions
of receptors in the skin react and
produce very small currents
these microcurrents reach different
regions of the brain via a dense network
of nerve fibers
when the electrical impulses connect
with specialized nerve cells there their
memory gates open
signal molecules are released
they trigger growth-promoting processes
directly in the other nerve cells or
they can reach cells via the blood and
trigger growth processes there
in the famine
this is how touch always produces a
reaction throughout the body
it changes our organism
we see this not only in babies but also
in adults
so we cannot ignore it because it
affects all aspects of our biology and
physiology
an experiment in the leipzig haptics lab
brain waves are recorded before during
and after a massage
martin grunvald has been interested in
gentle touch since the early 1990s
back then the topic was basically still
uncharted territory for the scientific
community
how does a massage change brain activity
the eeg measurements show that brain
waves slow down
the result is a profound state of
relaxation similar to when a person is
fast asleep
however the brain not only becomes less
active
it also releases a cocktail of messenger
signals
[Music]
when hormones and neurotransmitters are
released certain messenger chemicals go
on to reach the other areas of the body
through the bloodstream
this process leads to among other things
muscle relaxation a decrease in heart
rate and shallower breathing
there is a whole host of physical
changes
every single touch literally goes under
our skin
[Music]
we often overlook visual or acoustic
stimuli
but this is never the case with touch
because recognizing someone's touch and
analyzing it is essential for our
survival
in a millisecond our brains can
determine whether or not a touch poses a
threat
millions of receptors in our skin react
they register pressure vibration heat
cold and pain
passing on the information via nerve
fibers
scientists only recently discovered a
very special type of nerve fiber it
specializes exclusively in gentle
pleasant touch
these fibers do not provide us with
information about our external world
but they are able to register whether we
liked the touch or not
the discovery of these so-called sea
tactile afferents gives insight into
exactly how significant it touches for
our social lives
francis mcglone is one of the best known
researchers when it comes to these
stroking fibers
this discovery filled him with
excitement
[Music]
and i can remember the moment
i was reading a paper by what i would
say my one of my heroes in neuroscience
a professor aqua valbo
and orca valvo in this paper had
discovered a nerve fiber in the skin of
humans
called the c tactile afferent that
responded to gentle touch and when i was
reading that paper i was on a aeroplane
flying out of washington i could see
washington memorial on my through my
window and i was reading that paper and
i just at that moment a penny dropped i
thought i know exactly what that nerve
fiber is basically responding to from
that was 1995 or 96 and since then
i've been fortunate enough to
pursue my passion in characterizing and
understanding just what this nerdfighter
does and how vital it is
to our well-being
this finding led to the discovery of a
totally new sensory system
when we are gently touched information
about the type and location of the touch
is sent to the brain in a matter of
milliseconds
at the same time c-tactile afferents
also react
their signals only reach the brain after
one to two seconds
to be more exact to areas of the brain
that are responsible for processing
positive feelings how we think about
others
and self-perception
i think it's what glues social groups
together so this touch is playing a
fundamental role in in regulating
the the reward of
social contact in groups and when you're
together you're far more able to deal
with stresses from the outside
environment it's like the missing
particle that's allowed us to understand
just what the social brain
really fuels off
and that is this touch nerve that brings
everything together
perhaps the sea tactile afferents were
discovered so late because they are
difficult to find
a discovery of this magnitude requires
real specialists like here in ling coop
in sweden
a paper-thin needle pierces through the
skin into a nerve in the arm
the problem is that there are many
different fibers in the nerve which can
be connected to very different receptors
so it's a matter of finding the right
one
but what is the fiber reacting to
exactly
the needle is corrected until a fiber
finally responds to the gentle stroking
stimuli
it is a time-consuming procedure
usually taking hours
but it pays off
the researcher can finally determine to
what the sea tactile afferents respond
best
when you press gently with low force
with a slow stroking velocity like this
they are tuned to respond optimally to
this kind of stroke over the skin
and so we think that these see tactile
fibers
give us a sense of positive effective
touch and so it's pleasant touch
and so when we if we stroke the skin too
fast
or too slowly
it's not optimal but if we stroke it
like a gentle caress of the skin
it optimally activates these fibers and
we think that this is how you gain
pleasure out of touch
the so-called stroking robot experiments
demonstrate this
it can be used to test different touches
in exactly the same way on each test
subject
the more signals received via the c
tactile afferents the more pleasant the
test subjects perceive the touch
the effect is strongest at 34 degrees
celsius
the same temperature as our fingertips
and interestingly there's more of these
nerve fibers here
on the back than there are in the
forearm
so why do people like having their back
massage well they like having their back
massage because there's more of these
nerve fibers there
in evolutionary terms
why would you put a reward touch system
on the back well you can't get to your
back to groom it so you need to get
somebody else another primate needs to
come along and groom your back
[Music]
another indication that touch plays a
social role
[Music]
this highly complex system of receptors
and nerve fibers connects us with our
environment and other people
but see tactile afferents alone cannot
explain why we find touch so pleasant
because the same stimulus the gentle
touch of the skin
can trigger completely different
reactions depending on the situation and
who is touching us
[Music]
that's why the first thing our brain has
to learn is to distinguish whether we or
someone else is touching us
because that makes a huge difference to
our brain
[Music]
when i stroke my arm my brain can sort
of predict what's going to happen how
it's going to feel when i stroke my arm
and what happens is that the brain then
blocks out this information
so it's as if the brain suppresses the
feeling that occurs when i stroke my own
arm
and it does that by knowing what's going
to happen
and so it actually doesn't even matter
to us
so we don't consciously perceive the
touches
nevertheless we touch ourselves
constantly
mostly on the face
between 400 and 800 times a day
why
to answer this question martin
gruenvald's research group in leipzig
came up with an intriguing study
the hypothesis was if this is all just
biologically speaking irrelevant if this
is an unnecessary touch
then physiological changes in the brain
will not show up
but if this is a touch stimulus which is
important for us on a physical level
then there should be corresponding
neurophysiological changes in the brain
and this is exactly what we have shown
now
the test subjects are given the task to
feel different patterns on small plates
remember the structures and record them
later
they do not know that they are being
filmed while doing this
so that their brain waves can be
evaluated in parallel with their self
touching
when they try to remember what they have
felt they suddenly hear some disturbing
noises
the eeg reveals just how stressed the
test subjects are
[Music]
[Applause]
this gives researchers their first
chance to see in a laboratory setting
how the organism regulates itself in
this way
the annoying sounds disrupt their
concentration
all of the information stored in their
memory gets lost
they feel overwhelmed
and it is exactly at such a moment that
self-touching frequently occurs
the evaluation of brain waves shows how
short touch regulates brain activity
it goes back to a medium level of
arousal
as a result the test subjects can better
focus on the task at hand
and i think that's the first step
but when it comes to the processes
behind it
which parts of the brain trigger other
areas in the brain to make your hands
touch your face
so you can feel better
it's all a bit unclear
now but the question where does that
impulse to touch ourselves come from
is a very interesting philosophical
question
touch comes from outside and works deep
within us
it keeps us emotionally balanced
[Music]
and yet
self-touch
cannot replace the touch of another
person
[Music]
but why is it different when we are
touched
[Music]
and why does the same stimulus trigger
so many different reactions in our brain
from the greatest feelings of joy to
deep aversion
a caress can comfort calm and lower the
heart rate
for example if your best friend is in
distress
and a caress can also trigger us in
different ways
for example
when we're in love
then our pulse rises
we're aroused
because every single touch sends lots of
different information to our brain
[Music]
for example vibration pressure the
duration of touch so the qualities of
the touch but then it's also evaluated
and so it's also how did that touch make
me feel did i like it
do i want more of the touch and so the
brain actually puts together all this
information to deliver a whole a rounded
experience for touch
rebecca buma is investigating exactly
how and where this happens at the center
for medical image science and
visualization in lean cooping
today she wants to see not only the
brain but also the spinal cord at work
her theory the spinal cord might play a
much bigger role in processing touch
stimuli than previously thought
i think what is particularly exciting
about this is that we are now focusing a
little less on the brain
for a very long time neuroscience
revolved exclusively around everything
happening in the brain and we completely
disregarded the whole interaction
between brain and body and the
physiology of the body
before the signals from the sea tactile
afferents even reach the brain they must
first arrive in the spinal cord in the
dorsal horn
here the information i am being touched
is conveyed to other nerve cells
mainly interneurons which transmit and
process the information
only a few nerve cells then send
messages up to the brain
what is interesting here is that the
interneurons in the spinal cord receive
information from the brain
and this could impact our perception of
touch in the spinal cord depending on
the situation we are in and who is
touching us
everything is finally ready for the mri
measurements
the spinal cord activity also change
when the subject touches himself or is
touched
[Music]
the brain scans show that when the
subject touches himself activity in some
areas is significantly reduced compared
to the resting state
but it's quite a different story when
someone is touching us
many brain regions are clearly activated
especially regions in which we recognize
the intentions thoughts and plans of
others and which are responsible for
that feeling of reward
a major difference
does it also show up in the spinal cord
measurements alternating between the
brain and the spinal cord are now taken
which area becomes activated first
and how do they influence each other
so if the touch stimuli enter the spinal
cord via the nerves it is already
differentiated here between me and
others
the brain knows that i'm touching myself
maybe then we'll have less activation in
the spinal cord the brain knows someone
else is touching me maybe if it is
someone i particularly like
then it may be that the brain actually
increases the activity in the spinal
cord so that we react more sensitively
to it
now the data from the many test subjects
must be evaluated
the results could help us develop
innovative approaches to treating mental
illnesses or developing new types of
prostheses
anyone who feels a pleasant touch wants
more of it
the reward system in our brain is
responsible for this
hormones are released
the brain creates its own drugs so to
speak
mixing together a different cocktail
depending on the type of touch
[Music]
these include for example
endorphins
the so-called happiness hormones that
give us a high
and also oxytocin
the bonding hormone that makes us feel
close and connected to the other person
[Music]
this explains why a hug can be so much
more comforting than words
[Music]
because oxytocin plays a very important
role in how we form social bonds
it is popularly known as the cuddle
hormone and associated with birth and
sex
[Music]
but studies carried out on primates show
that oxytocin determines all of our
long-term social bonds
regardless of whether we are related or
have sexual interests
a friendship between primates is
expressed primarily through mutual
grooming
particularly high levels of oxytocin are
released when the two animals also have
intense contact with each other in other
ways
[Music]
the closer the primates are to each
other the more touching positively
affects them
this makes evolutionary sense because
oxytocin strengthens the need for
closeness and promotes appropriate
social behavior
and not only in the one who is receiving
loving attention
somebody who's giving touch also has to
be rewarded and that reward i think is
the building of the social relationship
that we discuss with primates grooming
the back of another primate you need to
build a relationship for that to happen
you scratch my back i'll scratch yours
at a basic level and that's reciprocity
and human behavior
[Music]
being in love only deepens our desire to
be touched
[Music]
oxytocin not only ensures this
but also feelings of reliability
fidelity and security in a relationship
and it even improves our health
[Music]
also has calming and growth inducing
effects
it also influences our immune system
it really is a versatile and useful
hormone substance
[Music]
couples with long-term elevated oxytocin
levels actually live longer
they are less susceptible to stress
their blood pressure is lower their pain
tolerance level is higher
and they are even better learners
[Music]
the more that couples parents children
and loved ones touch each other the more
loving they feel about the relationship
oxytocin binds us together
deepening our feeling of belonging
however the bonding hormone can also
have side effects
oxytocin doesn't just have these
wonderful positive effects making you
feel close to everyone around you
otherwise you could say that we should
give oxytocin to everyone and that will
make us all love each other which makes
for a conflict-free society
but oxytocin just reinforces the fact
that we only feel connected to the
people we are already close to you
so when it comes to people who we feel
do not belong to our group
we are even more distanced
[Music]
oxytocin reinforces the feeling of
having to defend our group against
others
[Music]
what does this mean in times like these
when we are supposed to keep our
distance
when we are supposed to limit physical
contact to our innermost circle
so far we can only speculate
but one thing is for sure
it is not good for us
rights physical contact is absolutely
essential to the existence of our
species
if it's missing for too long
physical and above all psychological
damage can occur
this is the first time in evolution
that primates have been told not to
touch each other it's a precedent that's
never happened before
and the cost and consequences
we don't know i mean you see the data of
mental health
rising
although the exact figures are not yet
available health insurers have noticed
that as social distancing measures have
increased so too has mental
health-related sick leave
anxiety disorders depression and even
addictions
quite a few of us are looking for a
substitute to replace what we are
missing
[Music]
and brains are very clever now that
could mean eating more drinking more
yeah
what people may be doing is finding a
substitute for that reward that wasn't
there mediated through gentle touch not
that they were necessarily aware that
that was the cause of it but there's a
reward state missing i need to get back
to feeling good i'll have a smoke i'll
have a cigarette i'll have a drink you
know i'll have a cream cake that's
possible
that these
behaviors that we're seeing now may well
be a consequence of the fact that we're
not socially touching anymore
bayata dietsen launched her own study at
the beginning of the lockdown in 2020.
how does social distancing impact us
is there a direct connection between our
lack of contact and our stress levels
the whole thesis that we say touch can
buffer this could now really be
investigated and with a really relevant
stressor compared to laboratory stress
tests that we used before
250 households from all over germany
participated in the study
families singles all age groups
before starting all test subjects were
sent saliva sample tests to their homes
then they had to answer questions on
different days
they received these questions as text
messages on their cell phone
do you feel lonely
are you in pain
do you have physical contact
how nervous and stressed do you feel
the answers were then directly related
to stress hormones
they took saliva samples while they were
answering these questions
and this gave us the opportunity to
combine the individual measurements the
psychobiological information with the
subject information in this everyday
survey
and because we had a relatively large
number of test subjects which in turn
produced a lot of measurements we can
then go on to compare these individual
measurements with each other and achieve
a statistically significant result
so we don't just have these average
values how much touch or proximity or
social contact per day they report but
we have it moment by moment
the saliva samples are now cooled and
stored at the institute the evaluation
begins
what are the cortisol levels like and
how high are the oxytocin levels
the assumption is that stress hormones
decrease more rapidly in people who
experience pleasant touch
and that is exactly what is so important
for us
[Music]
because stress is not inherently harmful
to our bodies
our evolutionary history already shows
this
in stressful situations it's usually a
matter of survival
for example when an attack is imminent
the body adapts to fight or flight at
lightning speed
it activates the cardiovascular system
lungs and muscles
at the same time the immune system kicks
in
it prepares itself to be able to quickly
heal from any impending injury
our defense against individual pathogens
or substances on the other hand shuts
down
our autonomic nervous system and stress
hormones are responsible for this
adrenaline noradrenaline and cortisol
as soon as the situation has been dealt
with these hormone levels drop again and
the mind and body can recover
pleasant touches dramatically decrease
stress hormones
making for a perfect buffer against
permanent stress that is harmful to our
health and more
[Music]
the sea tactile afferents that register
every gentle touch could also influence
how we perceive acute pain
[Music]
we've all done it
when we hurt ourselves we automatically
touch and caress the painful area
we don't even think about it
and science says that makes perfect
sense
studies show that touch has a very
positive influence on us
it can even inhibit acute pain
for example
when test subjects are confronted with
electrical stimuli or thermal stimuli
such as heat stimuli and pain is
triggered as a result
then touch can directly alleviate their
pain response
if something suddenly hurts the pain
sensors in the skin are the first to
sound the alarm
[Music]
these lightning speed nerve fibers
ensure that we notice the injury
immediately
for example we can immediately pull our
hand away from a hot stove top and
automatically rub our hand over the
painful area
at the same time however the pain signal
is also sent out via the slower
c-tactile afferent
if we now rub our hand over the painful
area the positive caress signals are
sent at the same time
our brain therefore receives a negative
and a positive signal simultaneously
and what happens is that when we are
stroked the brain sends the signal down
to lower levels of processing so maybe
in the thalamus or maybe already in the
spinal cord and tells the neurons there
okay calm down we are being stroked
it's all good
someone is there and so everything can
be taken down a notch
[Music]
we still don't know exactly how pain is
relieved
but it works
and not only for physical pain
touch also helps with emotional pain
often more effectively than words
[Music]
it communicates important information
between two people
it creates a deep emotional connection
that transcends words
[Music]
and yet as the world becomes
increasingly digitized we have less and
less physical contact with one another
and the pandemic has only further
reinforced this tendency
for most of us
not by choice
if you don't see people
in person you can't touch them and so i
i do believe that our interactions on
the internet and for example
the rise of people working from home
it does decrease the amount of touch
that we receive on a daily basis and if
we do have decreased touch it really
could impact on our well-being
today most of us touch our smartphones
or tablets far more than we touch other
people
we are in constant contact across
thousands of miles
but still very much alone
loneliness has become a mass phenomenon
with serious consequences for our health
because when we are on our own and lose
the protection of the group
the body goes on alert
cortisol levels rise
and the risk of heart attacks strokes
and depression increases with wise man
godzilla
does we know this already
thank god we know that loneliness can
have such serious consequences
just like smoking and alcohol
nicotine consumption and alcohol
consumption
loneliness is just as big of a health
threat
from smoking diabetes pollution etc is
maybe 35 40
the other race of an early death from
loneliness is something like 45 percent
and that's almost a that's almost a
global pandemic in its own right but
nobody's really woken up to the fact
that what lonely people don't get is
touch
hello
video calls can give us a sense of
closeness to family and friends
but they cannot replace physical
proximity
many of us have now become aware of this
[Laughter]
before the pandemic
commercials were full of happy people in
front of tablets
in front of cameras
waving to each other
greeting their loved ones around the
globe
everyone was content and happy
since the pandemic
we've all had to rely on our digital
devices
peering into some little camera doing
our best to balance our work while still
keeping our social lives going
and the majority of us almost 90 percent
are incredibly unhappy with this type of
communication
what would it be like if in the future
we could also touch each other in the
virtual world
until now our sense of touch has always
been considered too complex to be
technically replicated
touching over the internet
in this video it seems to work
a mother is touching the screen
and her child feels her touch remotely
[Music]
john rogers of northwestern university
helped develop the system
he and his team want to make long
distance touch possible
[Music]
what we've tried to do is to develop
technologies that are compatible with
the human body soft flexible
skin interface platforms that you can
almost think of as a as like a second
skin
that can laminate onto different parts
of the body that might be of interest
they connect the artificial skin
wirelessly to the computer
when the screen is touched the small
integrated electronic elements react
[Music]
they convert the electrical currents
into pressure and vibrations
but the artificial skin cannot simulate
gentle touching
but it is a step in the right direction
that i think replicates the kind of
touch that can serve as
you know a deeply sort of emotional and
personal
uh you know connection with with other
other people so so we think about it uh
you know in terms of um you know adding
to the uh social media experience that
that maybe we're engaging in right now
which is currently dominated only by
visual and auditory cues if you were
wearing a device i would be able to pat
your shoulder for example and you would
be able to to feel that you know in in
real
time two of his employees show just how
noticeable these touches are
one draws letters on the screen
his colleague can feel and reproduce
them on his arm
this artificial skin is not yet ready
for the market
but there are a number of potential
applications
video games
feeling prosthesis and internet
communication
social media is one application that's
that's sort of obvious to think about i
think especially in the context of what
we're living through right now with with
the pandemic and
sort of remote safe engagement uh that
still retains that um you know that that
that interaction based on touch and and
it's really hard to replicate that and
you can't really replicate it just with
video and audio
touches sent online from a distance
could they provide a solution for those
in need of physical contact for example
for older people living alone or those
in long distance relationships
at the very least it might be better
than no touching at all
but could this ever replace the feeling
we experienced during a face-to-face
encounter
you may be able to apply
a jacket and somebody can give you a
virtual hug which is quite a fun concept
however i still don't think it takes the
place of actual touch and the
reinforcement that you get from somebody
hugging you and both you enjoying it and
them they enjoy it as well when it's
hard of heart
when things get tough like during the
pandemic
it becomes clear that what we are truly
longing for isn't technology
we want a real person who goes out for a
beer with us or reads us poetry
[Music]
touch always has a direct and immediate
effect
it evokes emotions
[Music]
we all need it
it's a basic component of our biological
makeup
we are all equipped with receptors for
gentle touch
[Music]
and yet everyone experiences touch
differently
experiences our cultural background how
we perceive ourselves and our current
situation
all this influences whether and when we
like it
[Music]
but habit also shapes how we feel
our cuddle sensors need to be trained
regularly
throughout our lives
people who are not touched
or do not want to be touched
find gentle caressing less pleasant over
time
[Music]
and we think that
if you get touched less and less in your
life
you miss it so much that you actually
you probably feel sad about it you may
become depressed about it
and that's not good because
you actually appreciate the touch less
and less and so you seek touch less and
less
so really for touch you have to have
touch on a
on a
on a basis which is very regular
otherwise we tend to lose these these
signals these interactions and
it takes effort to to reinforce them
again
[Music]
fortunately our sense of touch can
return at any time
it stays with us throughout our lives
even into old age
a caress can still reach a person even
when they are barely connected to the
physical world
it conveys emotions that we so urgently
need especially towards the end of life
reliability
safety
and security
[Music]
rochelle ackerly has made a remarkable
discovery
the case of touch is very interesting
because
it's true that for the other senses
they
diminish
with time and so as we get older you see
less well you hear less well
however for touch it seems to have two
layers
so the touch that you have which is what
we call discriminative touch it's the
touch for example when you reach out and
touch something with your hands
that does decrease with age so
um
it's every
for example every ten years or so in
your life you will lose about five
percent of all the touch fibers in your
nerves
however what we find is that when people
get older
they appreciate touch more and they
actually find touch more pleasurable
[Music]
we often don't realize how strongly
touch affects our mood our health
and our relationships
but we are becoming more and more aware
of it
touch makes us happy
throughout our lives
[Music]
you